JUDY WOODRUFF: Monday
marks the 50th anniversary
of the beginning of
the June 1967 Six-Day
War, fought between
Israel and several
neighboring Arab nations.
The swift Israeli
victory was total.
But no one knew at the time,
and in the war's aftermath,
that many of the dividing lines
struck would define
relations in the region
for the ensuing 50 years.
Former "NewsHour" correspondent
Terence Smith reported on
the war then for The New York
Times, and he remembers those
historic days for us now.
TERENCE SMITH, Former "NewsHour"
Correspondent: The Six-Day War
between Israel and her Arab
neighbors began 50 years ago
shortly after dawn on the hot,
dry morning of June 5, 1967.
In the course of six frantic
days, Israel decimated the
armies and air forces of Egypt,
Jordan and Syria, and redrew
the map of the Middle East.
The war created a
stalemate between Israel
and the Palestinians
in Jerusalem and the
West Bank that
persists to this day.
It is the same stand-off
that confronted President
Trump on his recent visit.
I covered the battle for
Jerusalem and the West
Bank as an incredibly
green, inexperienced
correspondent for
The New York Times.
I had arrived in Israel just 10
days before on my first foreign
assignment for the paper,
and I knew nothing.
Scrambling after the Israeli
army units as they conquered the
ancient Old City of Jerusalem,
I followed them inside as they
took control of the Western
Wall, the retaining wall of
the Second Temple.
Suddenly, the troops were
face-to-face with the
holiest site in Judaism.
Israelis had not been
able to visit or pray
at the wall since 1948.
It was quite a moment.
I covered the Israeli units
as they swept through the West
Bank, driving Jordan's Arab
legion from Bethlehem
down to Jericho and to the
banks of the Jordan River.
Burned-out Jordanian tanks
and armored personnel
carriers littered the highway.
Where the troops stopped then
is the armistice line today.
The fighting in Jerusalem
and on the West Bank had been
fierce, with heavy casualties,
but it was largely
over in 96 hours.
Israelis and Palestinians
alike were stunned.
Suddenly, two peoples
who had been separated by
the so-called Green Line
for 19 years confronted
each other.
Both sides were curious
about the other.
As soon as they could,
ordinary Israelis poured
into the walled Old City.
Curiosity and the universal
human instinct for bargains
drove them into the shops in
the narrow streets
of the Old City.
The shelves on the Jordanian
side were stocked with duty-free
electronics and small luxuries
that were unavailable
or much more expensive
in high-tariff Israel.
The bargains flew
off the shelves.
And not just ordinary Israelis.
Teddy Kollek, the mayor of
Israeli Jerusalem, and Israel's
defense minister, Moshe Dayan,
both famous antiquities
collectors, descended
on the Arab dealers
in East Jerusalem and
negotiated for ancient treasures
to add to their collections.
Palestinians began to explore
West Jerusalem and meet
Israelis for the first time.
A few had the nerve to travel
to Jaffa to visit homes that
they or their parents had
fled in 1948.
In the process of getting
to know each other in
the first weeks after
the war, Palestinians
discovered that Israelis were
not, in fact, 10 feet-tall, and
Israelis found that Palestinians
were not, in fact,
all cutthroats.
It wasn't all
sweetness and light.
A lot of blood had been spilled.
But people on either side of the
Green Line wanted to see what
they could while they could.
There was a shared assumption
that, because the Israeli
victory had been so total, that,
this time, some sort of
peace was inevitable.
It was an assumption, not
necessarily an aspiration,
not for everyone.
People on both sides expected
that the cease-fire would be
replaced by an agreement, Israel
would give up some of the
occupied territory, just as it
had during the Suez crisis nine
years earlier, and that,
this time, finally,
there would be peace.
How could it not?
No one I spoke to in
those months after the
war thought that the
stand-off between Israel
and the Palestinians
would last for 50 years.
Even the deeply cynical Moshe
Dayan famously said he was
just waiting for the phone to
ring from the other
side to negotiate peace.
It wasn't to be.
By the fall of that year, the
Arab states met in Khartoum
and agreed on their famous
three no's: no negotiation,
no recognition, no
peace with Israel.
At the same time, the first
Jewish settlers had established
a rump settlement on the West
Bank, promising not to leave.
I remember asking Dayan at a
news conference, what was going
to be done about the settlers?
"If we can solve the big
issues," he told me, "the
settlers will be no problem."
Today, there are some 400,000
Israelis settlers in the West
Bank and 350,000 more in East
Jerusalem.
They are still promising not
to leave, and constitute a
major political voice on the
right in Israel.
So, the elements of
a deadlock, the same
deadlock that has defied a
solution for 50 years, were
in place before
the year was out.